
https://isevjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/

==============================================


https://isevjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jev2.12419





Journal of Extracellular Vesicles
Volume 13, Issue 3 e12419
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access
Extracellular vesicles as a promising source of lipid biomarkers for breast cancer detection in blood plasma
Erika Dorado, Maria Luisa Doria, Anika Nagelkerke, James S. McKenzie, Stefania Maneta-Stavrakaki, Thomas E. Whittaker, Jeremy K. Nicholson, Raoul Charles Coombes, Molly M. Stevens, Zoltan Takats
First published: 05 March 2024
https://doi.org/10.1002/jev2.12419



Abstract

Extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes and microvesicles, mediate intercellular communication in cancer, from development to metastasis. EV-based liquid biopsy is a promising strategy for cancer diagnosis as EVs can be found in cancer patients’ body fluids. In this study, the lipid composition of breast cancer-derived EVs was studied as well as the potential of blood plasma EVs for the identification of lipid biomarkers for breast cancer detection. Initially, an untargeted lipidomic analysis was carried out for a panel of cancerous and non-cancerous mammary epithelial cells and their secreted EVs. We found that breast cancer-derived EVs are enriched in sphingolipids and glycerophospholipids compared to their parental cells. The initial in vitro study showed that EVs and their parental cells can be correctly classified (100% accuracy) between cancerous and non-cancerous, as well as into their respective breast cancer subtypes, based on their lipid composition. Subsequently, an untargeted lipidomic analysis was carried out for blood plasma EVs from women diagnosed with breast cancer (primary or progressive metastatic breast cancer) as well as healthy women. Correspondingly, when blood plasma EVs were analysed, breast cancer patients and healthy women were correctly classified with an overall accuracy of 93.1%, based on the EVs’ lipid composition. Similarly, the analysis of patients with primary breast cancer and healthy women showed an overall accuracy of 95% for their correct classification. Furthermore, primary and metastatic breast cancers were correctly classified with an overall accuracy of 89.5%. This reveals that the blood plasma EVs’ lipids may be a promising source of biomarkers for detection of breast cancer. Additionally, this study demonstrates the usefulness of untargeted lipidomics in the study of EV lipid composition and EV-associated biomarker discovery studies. This is a proof-of-concept study and a starting point for further analysis on the identification of EV-based biomarkers for breast cancer.
1 INTRODUCTION

Breast cancer continues to be the most commonly diagnosed cancer worldwide, and its future burden is predicted to continue to increase in the decades to come (Arnold et al., 2022). Over 2.3 million new breast cancer cases occurred in 2020, with an incidence rate over 80 per 100,000 females in parts of Europe, Northern America and Australia/New Zealand (Arnold et al., 2022). By 2040, the number of new cases is predicted to increase by over 40% (Arnold et al., 2022). Breast cancer can be classified into different molecular subtypes based on the expression of the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2, also known as HER2/neu or ErbB2) or the lack of the expression of these receptors (triple-negative breast cancer, TNBC) (Langlands et al., 2013). Self-examination, clinical breast exam and imaging are the first steps for a breast cancer diagnosis, but a tissue biopsy using invasive methods is required if malignancy is suspected (Newell & Mahoney, 2014). A liquid biopsy could bring significant benefits in the screening, early diagnosis, prognosis and monitoring of the progression of breast cancer, which subsequently contribute to the patients’ early access to treatment (Alimirzaie et al., 2019; Tay & Tan, 2021; Venetis et al., 2023).

Extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes and microvesicles, are found in body fluids and can be a source of biomarkers for cancer diagnosis (Logozzi et al., 2009, Skotland et al., 2017). Cancer cells as well as immune cells produce EVs, which play an important role in cancer development, progression and metastasis (Bell and Taylor, 2016; Boelens et al., 2014; Tickner et al., 2014). Proteins and microRNA found in EVs have been widely analysed (Kalra et al., 2012, Keerthikumar et al., 2016). In contrast, their lipid content remains underexplored. The lipid composition of cancer-derived EVs has mainly been studied by analysing melanoma, colorectal, breast and prostate cancer cell lines (Brzozowski et al., 2018; Hosseini-Beheshti et al., 2012; Llorente et al., 2013; Lobasso et al., 2021; Lydic et al., 2015; Nishida-Aoki et al., 2020; Skotland et al., 2017). In breast cancer, a lipidomic study of two metastatic TNBC cell lines found enrichment of unsaturated diacylglycerols in EVs produced by high-metastatic cells compared to EVs produced by low-metastatic cells (Nishida-Aoki et al., 2020). Lipidomic analysis of urinary EVs from prostate cancer patients has suggested that a combination of two phosphatidylserines (PS) and one lactosylceramide (LacCer) can distinguish between healthy individuals and prostate cancer patients; PS(18:1/18:1), PS(18:0_18:2) and LacCer(d18:1/16:0) (Skotland et al., 2017). This demonstrates the importance of lipidomic analysis of EVs found in cancer patients’ body fluids and its potential for the identification of lipid biomarkers for cancer diagnosis.

Lipidomic analysis using mass spectrometry (MS)-based approaches such as liquid chromatography-MS (LC-MS) and imaging MS allow a comprehensive study of lipid alterations in cancer, including breast cancer. High levels of sphingolipids have been detected in breast cancer tissue when compared to normal breast tissue, using LC-MS-based approaches (Nagahashi et al., 2016). Similarly, differences in the lipid profile between breast cancer subtypes have been found by analysing breast cancer cell lines (Eiriksson et al., 2020). In addition, MS-based technologies using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) (Kang et al., 2011), desorption electrospray ionisation (DESI) (Guenther et al., 2015) and rapid evaporative ionization mass spectrometry (REIMS) (St John et al., 2017) have demonstrated to be robust technologies for breast cancer detection, thanks to the high sensitivity and relative straightforwardness of studying the lipid content of cancerous tissues by MS.

EV-based liquid biopsy could overcome the limitations associated with tissue biopsy; this includes access to tumour tissue and invasiveness, as well as tumour heterogeneity (Armakolas et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2021; Martins et al., 2021). Lipidomic analysis of EVs circulating in cancer patients’ body fluids combines the robustness and sensitivity of MS-based technologies for cancer detection with the clinical advantage of using non- or minimally invasive methods for sample collection. This approach has great potential not only for cancer diagnosis, but also for cancer prognosis, monitoring and stratified medicine. In this proof-of-concept study, we studied the lipid composition of EVs produced by breast cancer cell lines from a range of molecular subtypes and the potential of EVs found in breast cancer patients’ blood plasma for the identification of lipid biomarkers for breast cancer detection. We carried out an untargeted lipidomic analysis of a comprehensive panel of cancerous and non-cancerous mammary epithelial cells and their secreted EVs, as well as EVs found in blood plasma from breast cancer patients and healthy women. To date, this approach has not been explored.
2 MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 Mammary epithelial cells cultures

Nine breast cancer cell lines were studied: two ER+/PR+ (MCF-7 and T47D), two HER2+ (HCC1954 and JIMT-1) and five TNBC cell lines (MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, HCC1937 and Hs578T). In addition, non-cancerous mammary epithelial cells (MCF-10A and HuMEC) were also analysed. The cells were authenticated using Single Tandem Repeat analysis (STR), except HuMEC which was obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific (MA, USA). All cells except MCF-10A and HuMEC were cultured in high glucose Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1x penicillin/streptomycin, 20 mM HEPES and 1x non-essential amino acids (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 5% (v/v) horse serum, 1x penicillin/streptomycin (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific), 20 ng/mL epidermal growth factor (PeproTech, NJ, USA), 10 µg/mL insulin, 100 ng/mL cholera toxin and 0.5 µg/mL hydrocortisone (all from Sigma–Aldrich, MO, USA) was used to culture MCF-10A cells. HuMEC cells were maintained in HuMEC Ready Medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were maintained at 37°C in 5% CO2. Experiments for each cell line were performed in triplicate.
2.2 Isolation of EVs from conditioned medium

EV isolation was performed as described previously (Horgan et al., 2020; Penders et al., 2021). Cells were expanded in 10x T225 cell culture flasks and once cells reached ∼80%–90% confluency, they were maintained in their respective supplemented medium in the absence of serum for 72 h. For HuMEC Ready Medium (serum-free), the bovine pituitary extract was omitted due to presence of abundant particulates. Conditioned media was harvested, filtered with a 0.45 µm membrane bottle-top filter, and stored at −80°C until further processing. The conditioned media were concentrated using 100 kDa MWCO Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter devices (Sigma–Aldrich) and centrifugation at 5000 x g at 4°C to a final volume of 500 µL. Subsequently, EVs were isolated by size exclusion chromatography using a Sepharose CL-2B (Sigma–Aldrich) column (1 cm × 30 cm) packed to approximately 28 cm and equilibrated using particle-free Dulbecco's Phosphate-Buffered Saline (DPBS, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Concentrated conditioned media was loaded onto the column and DPBS was used as the mobile phase. Fractions of 1 mL were eluted by gravity and the peak fractions containing the EVs (fractions 8–12) were pooled and stored at −80°C until further analyses.
2.3 Whole blood collection

Before surgery was undertaken, blood samples were collected from ten women with primary breast cancer (age range 36–68 years and median age 52 years). All primary breast cancer samples, except one, were obtained from treatment-naive patients. Blood samples were obtained from an additional nine women with progressive metastatic breast cancer (age range 36–72 years and median age 53 years), who were under cancer treatment but not responding to the treatment. In addition, samples were obtained from ten healthy women who neither had pre-existing medical conditions and infections at the time the samples were collected or in the previous weeks (age range 36–62 years and median age 50 years). Whole blood samples were collected under fasting conditions by venepuncture using EDTA (K2E) vacutainer tubes. Blood plasma was obtained by 10 min centrifugation at 1000 x g at 4°C, followed by the collection of the supernatant and its centrifugation in a new tube for 10 min at 2000 x g at 4°C. The blood plasma obtained was stored at −80°C until further analyses.
2.4 Ethics approval

Human samples used in this research project were obtained from the Imperial College Healthcare Tissue Bank (ICHTB). Tissue Bank projects Ref R17023, R11015 and R16056. ICHTB is supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre based at Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust and Imperial College London. ICHTB is approved by Wales REC3 to release human material for research (22/WA/0214). All women participated voluntarily, and their personal data was kept anonymous.
2.5 Isolation of EVs from human blood plasma

The blood plasma samples were centrifuged at 5000 x g for 15 min at 4°C in order to remove cell debris, if still present. The supernatant was transferred into a new tube and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C to remove larger microvesicles. The supernatant was then transferred into a new tube, and it was kept at 4°C to be used the same day. Iodixanol density gradients were prepared using OptiPrep (60%, w/v, Sigma–Aldrich) according to the manufacture's recommendations. Initially, a working solution of 50% OptiPrep was obtained by mixing five volumes of 60% OptiPrep with one volume of a homogenisation solution, consisting of 0.25 M sucrose, 6 mM EDTA and 6 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4. The OptiPrep working solution was diluted to 30% and 6%, in a buffer solution consisting of 0.25 M sucrose, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4. One mL of 30% and 1 mL of 6% OptiPrep were layered in ultra-clear centrifuge tubes (Beckman Coulter, CA, USA) from bottom to top. This was followed by 3 mL of the blood plasma which was clear of debris and larger microvesicles. The samples were centrifuged in a Beckman Coulter's SW 55 Ti swinging-bucket rotor for 2 h at 120,000 x gavg at 4°C, setting up the acceleration to maximum and deceleration to zero. The centrifugation tubes were carefully removed from the rotor and ten 500 µL fractions were collected from top to bottom. The fractions nine and ten, containing the EVs (but also lipoproteins with the same density, mainly High-Density Lipoproteins (HDL)) were added on top of a chromatography column (Bio-Rad, CA, USA) containing 2 mL of Capto Core 700 (Sigma–Aldrich), which combines size separation and binding chromatography to deplete co-isolation of non-EV components. Once the mix of the two fractions containing EVs entered the stationary phase completely, DPBS was used as the mobile phase and three 1 mL fractions were collected by gravity for EVs’ analysis, pooled and stored at −80°C until further analyses.
2.6 Density gradient measurement

The absorbance of 6%, 10%, 20% and 30% iodixanol solutions (OptiPrep) were measured at 340 nm by spectrophotometry (as suggested by manufacturer) and a standard curve was created. The absorbance of each fraction collected was also measured and their density calculated based on the iodixanol standard curve.
2.7 Nanoparticle tracking analysis

EVs’ concentration was measured using a NanoSight NS300 (Malvern Panalytical Ltd, England, United Kingdom) equipped with a 532 nm laser and a sCMOS camera. EVs were diluted in particle-free DPBS to a concentration of 1–10 × 108 particles/mL. Five 60 s videos were analysed of the diluted EVs using NTA V3.0 software.
2.8 Protein quantification

Protein concentration analysis was carried out using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturers’ instructions. Samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 min and absorbance was measured at 562 nm.
2.9 Immunoblotting analyses

A pooled sample of EVs isolated from blood plasma and a pooled sample of blood plasma were analysed using western blotting. Proteins were extracted from the pooled samples by adding RIPA lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors and sonication (mode pulse) for 20 s in ice-water. Samples were mixed for 1 h at 4°C and then centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants (10 µL) were used for protein concentration analysis using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein extracts (15 µg) were mixed with Laemmli sample buffer (Bio-Rad) without reducing agent, loaded and separated on 4%–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX precast protein gels (Bio-Rad). Proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Bio-Rad) and blocked in 5% (w/v) non-fat dry milk (Bio-Rad) in TBS-T (Tris-Buffered Saline with 0.1% (v/v) Tween-20 (Sigma–Aldrich)) for 1 h at room temperature, followed by three 10 min washes in TBS-T. Three primary antibodies were evaluated: mouse anti-CD9 (Cat#10626D, RRID:AB_2532982), anti-CD81 (Cat#10630D, RRID:AB_2532984) and anti-apopoliprotein A1 (ApoA1, Cat#MIA1405, RRID:AB_11152905), all from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The membranes were incubated overnight at 4°C in one of the primary antibodies diluted 1:1000 in 5% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (Sigma–Aldrich). Subsequently, membranes were washed three times in TBS-T and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with secondary HRP-linked antibody against mouse IgG (1:2000 in blocking buffer, Cell Signaling Technology (MA, USA) Cat#7076, RRID:AB_330924). After additional washing in TBS-T three times, the membranes were scanned using the LAS-3000 Imaging system (Fujifilm, Japan).
2.10 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)

EVs isolated from blood plasma were analysed using TEM by simple drop casting. In one typical preparation, 1 µL of sample was drop casted directly onto a copper grid (Carbon support film square grid, 400 mesh, 5–6 nm, copper, Electron Microscopy Sciences) and allowed to dry at room temperature overnight. Dried samples were then imaged with a JEOL 2100Plus (LEOL, Japan) transmission electron microscope at 200 kV.
2.11 Lipid extraction

Lipids were extracted from EVs and cells based on the Bligh and Dyer method (Bligh & Dyer, 1959). To summarise, 3.75 mL of chloroform:methanol (1:2, v/v) were added to 1 mL of the sample homogenized in LC-MS grade water and vortexed. Samples were processed on ice and incubated for 30 min for the extraction of the lipids into the organic phase. After the incubation time, 1.25 mL of chloroform was added, and the samples were vortexed. Next, 1.25 mL of LC-MS grade water was added and the mixture vortexed again. The samples were centrifuged at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4°C to separate the chloroform layer (bottom layer) containing the lipids from the aqueous or methanolic layer (top layer) containing non-lipids. In parallel, ‘blank samples’ were prepared by replacing the sample by 1 mL of LC-MS grade water to allow a washing step to be included and obtain a much cleaner sample of lipids. The washing step consisted of interchanging the organic and aqueous layers between the ‘blank samples’ and the samples, and then centrifuging at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. After the final centrifugation, the organic layer was collected and dried using nitrogen. The lipids extracted from mammary epithelial cells and their EVs were reconstituted in acetonitrile/isopropanol (1:1, v/v), the samples were normalised based on the protein concentration estimated from the protein disc obtained during the lipid extraction. Lipids extracted from blood plasma EVs were reconstituted in LC-MS grade water/isopropanol (1:5, v/v) based on the number of EVs per sample.
2.12 UPLC-MS and UPLC-MS/MS analyses

Lipids extracted from cells and their released EVs, as well as from EVs isolated from blood plasma, were analysed by Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC)-MS. An ACQUITY UPLC System coupled to a Waters XEVO G2 Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, MA, USA) was used. The liquid chromatographic separation of the compounds was carried out using an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C8 Column (1.7 µm, 2.1 × 100 mm, column temperature 55°C). Mobile phase A consisted of LC-MS grade water:acetonitrile:isopropanol (2:1:1, v/v/v), 5 mM ammonium acetate, 0.05% acetate acid and 20 µM phosphoric acid. Mobile B consisted of acetonitrile:isopropanol (1:1, v/v), 5 mM ammonium acetate and 0.05% acetic acid. The binary gradient profile for the LC-MS analyses of the mammary cells and their EVs was 99.9% mobile phase A (0.0–2.0 min), 70% A (2.0–11.5 min), 10% A (11.5–12.0 min), 0.1% A (12.0–12.50 min) and 99.9% A (12.50–14.6 min). LC-MS analyses of lipids extracted from EVs isolated from blood plasma were carried using the facilities and methodologies defined by the National Phenome Centre from Imperial College London for the untargeted lipidomic analysis of human blood plasma. The binary gradient profile was 99% mobile phase A (0.0–2.0 min), 70% A (2.0–11.5 min), 10% A (11.5–12.0 min), 0.1% A (12.0–12.50 min), 35% A (12.50–12.55 min), 70% A (12.55–12.65 min), 99% A (12.65–12.75 min) and 99% A (12.75–13.25 min). For both, the MS and MS/MS data were acquired for 0.1 s in the centroid mode in both positive electrospray ionization mode (ESI+) and negative electrospray ionization mode (ESI-). Mass spectrometer source parameters were as follow: capillary voltage 2 kV (ESI+) or 1.5 kV (ESI-), sampling cone voltage 25 V, source temperature 120°C, desolvation temperature 600°C, cone gas flow 150 (L/h) and desolvation flow 1000 (L/h). Quality Control (QC) samples containing a pool of all the samples evaluated and lipid internal standards were included in the set of samples analysed. This was to assess the quality of the data throughout the whole running time. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was achieved for QC samples to perform MS/MS experiments to identify lipid species. A collision energy ramp of 22–37 V was applied for the fragmentation of the parent ions for both electrospray ionization modes. In addition, individual MS/MS experiments were also carried out for the relevant lipid species identified.
2.13 Data analysis

MS data pre-processing was undertaken using XCMS open-source software (Smith et al., 2006). The XCMS outputs included m/z, retention time and intensity for each peak detected. Features with coefficients of variation (CV%) in QC samples higher than 30% (non-reproducible measurements) were removed from the outputs. Sample intensities were normalised by probabilistic quotient normalisation for univariate analysis. For principal components analysis (PCA), the intensities were also log10 transformed. Univariate and multivariate analyses were carried out using Python programming language (IPython, RRID:SCR_001658) and the package scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011). To identify the lipid species significantly enriched in EVs when compared to their parental cells, log2 fold changes were calculated for each detected feature based on the mean of the normalised relative abundances for each group studied (i.e., cells and EVs). A threshold of log2 fold > 2 or < −2 was defined for the analysis of the lipid enrichment between EVs and cells, respectively. Statistically significant differences between the means of EVs and cells were calculated by one-way ANOVA. P-values were adjusted by Benjamini–Hochberg correction (q-values) and a threshold of statistical significance was set at lower than 0.05 (q-value < 0.05). Spearman rank-order correlation coefficient was calculated for paired cells and their secreted EVs to identify lipids correlated between these two groups (i.e., cells and EVs). Logistic regression classification with recursive feature elimination (LR-RFE) analysis was performed for the selection of a subset of the most relevant features for the analysis between groups (i.e., cancer and no-cancer, or between the three types of breast cancer subtypes studied). To evaluate the performance of the LR-RFE model, leave-one-group-out cross-validated LR classification was performed for the study of EVs and their parental cells (biological replicates were defined as one group) and leave-one-individual-out cross-validated LR classification for the study of EVs found in blood plasma. The Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUROC) curve was determined to measure the accuracy of the LR classification models generated with a reduced number of features. The LC-MS datasets obtained by ESI+ and ESI− modes were fused by concatenation, with all variables being auto-scaled (subtraction of mean and division by standard deviation) for LR-RFE classification; box plots also show auto-scaled data. Lipid annotations were performed using in-house databases and matching them with online lipid databases (LIPID MAPS, HMDB and METLIN) and by the manual verification of MS/MS spectrum. Mann–Whitney U tests were performed to evaluate whether significant differences were observed in the number of EV's isolated from the blood plasma samples of the three groups studied: (i) healthy volunteers, (ii) primary breast cancer and (iii) progressive metastatic breast cancer.
3 RESULTS

Untargeted lipidomic analysis using reversed-phase LC-MS was carried out for cancerous and non-cancerous human mammary epithelial cells and their secreted EVs, and subsequently for EVs found in blood plasma from women with breast cancer as well as healthy women. The methodology implemented in this study allowed the identification of a wide range of lipids. This included sphingolipids among them sphingomyelins (SM), ceramides (Cer), and hexosylceramides (HexCer); glycerophospholipids included PS, phosphatidylcholines (PC), ether-PC, phosphatidylinositols (PI), phosphatidylethanolamines (PE), ether-PE, phosphatidic acids (PA) phosphatidylglycerols (PG), lysophosphatidic acids (LPA), lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPE), and lysophosphatidylcholines (LPC); glycerolipids included triglycerides (TG); and fatty acids (FA).
3.1 Sphingolipids and glycerophospholipids are the most abundant lipids in breast cancer-derived EVs

Initially, an in vitro study was carried out to understand the lipid composition of EVs produced by breast cancer cells. For this, an untargeted lipidomic analysis of a comprehensive panel of cultured cancerous human mammary epithelial cell lines and their secreted EVs was carried out. The cell panel included nine breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, T47D, HCC1954, JIMT-1, MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, HCC1937 and Hs578T) representative of the ER+/PR+, HER2+ and TNBC molecular subtypes. The EVs produced in vitro by the mammary epithelial cells analysed in this study had a vesicular morphology and were positive for the EV marker proteins CD9, CD63 and CD81, as previously reported for this cell panel (Penders et al., 2021). The PCA carried out to understand the distribution of the LC-MS data in both ESI+ and ESI− modes showed a separation between EVs and cells based on their lipid compositions (Figure 1a). PCA showing the distribution of the LC-MS for each biological replicate in both ESI+ and ESI− modes is shown in Figure S1. A volcano plot was generated to display the lipids found to be significantly (q-value < 0.05) enriched in breast cancer-derived EVs (log2 fold change > 2), when compared to their parental cells (log2 fold change < −2), as depicted in Figure 1b. Sphingolipids (Cer, SM and HexCer) and glycerophospholipids (LPC, LPE, PC, ether-PE, and PI) were significantly enriched in EVs, when compared to their parental cells (Figure 1b and Table S1). In contrast, cells were mainly enriched in TG, FA and PG when compared to EVs (Figure 1b and Table S2). EVs could be produced by multivesicular bodies, plasma membrane as well as the Golgi apparatus, and consequently do not represent the entirety of cellular components.


To identify lipids which were highly correlated between EVs and their parental cells, the cells and their respective secreted EVs were paired and Spearman rank-order correlation coefficients calculated (Table S3). Ether-PC, ether-PE and HexCer showed a very strong (Spearman rs > 0.9) correlation between EVs and their parental cells (Table S3). In addition, PE, PC and PA species were also identified within those lipids that had a very strong (Spearman rs > 0.8) correlation between cells and EVs. This suggests that cells and their secreted EVs’ lipid composition are to some extent related and that the lipid arrangement in EVs could be connected to their cellular origin, including their cancerous origin.
3.2 EVs and their parental cells can be correctly classified into cancerous and non-cancerous

To understand whether mammary epithelial cells and their secreted EVs could be classified into cancerous and non-cancerous, we analysed the lipid composition of cancerous (MCF-7, T47D, HCC1954, JIMT-1, MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, HCC1937 and Hs578T) and non-cancerous human mammary epithelial cells (MCF-10A and HuMEC) as well as their secreted EVs. The LC-MS data from the ESI+ and ESI− modes were fused and auto-scaled to ensure equal contribution of features in both datasets. An LR-RFE analysis for the fused and auto-scaled LC-MS datasets allowed us to identify PE and PC species which allowed EVs and cells to be correctly classified into cancerous or non-cancerous (Figure 2a,b). The relevant lipid species included PE(18:2_22:3) [M-H]−, PC(16:1_22:6) [M+H]+, PE(O-18:2_22:6) [M-H]− and PC(18:0_18:1) [M+OAc]−. The leave-one-group-out cross-validated LR classification, carried out to evaluate the performance of the LR-RFE model, showed that EVs and cells can be classified into cancerous or non-cancerous with 100% accuracy, based on those lipid species. In addition, ROC analysis based on the combination of these four relevant lipid species showed an outstanding AUROC value equal to 1, indicating the ability of these PE and PC species to distinguish EVs and cells between cancerous and non-cancerous. Equally, an AUROC equal to 1 can be obtained for PE(18:2_22:3) and PC(16:1_22:6) when analysed separately, indicating these are the main drivers of the classification of EVs and cells into cancerous and non-cancerous. Additionally, a leave-one-group-out cross-validated LR classification analysis showed that the EVs secreted by the non-cancerous and cancerous mammary epithelial cells can be correctly classified with an overall accuracy of 87.9% (Figure 2c), based on the sphingolipids found enriched in breast cancer-derived EVs when compared to their parental cells (Figure 1b, Table S1 and Figure S2).



3.3 EVs and their parental cells can be correctly classified into their respective breast cancer subtype

For the fused LC-MS datasets, a LR-RFE analysis was performed to study whether EVs and their parental cancerous cells could be correctly classified into the three breast cancer subtypes studied; ER+/PR+, HER2+ and TNBC, based on their lipid composition. The LR-RFE model allowed the identification of phospholipid species contributing to the classification of the cancerous cells and EVs into their respective breast cancer subtypes (Figure 3a). These relevant lipid species included PE(14:0_16:0) [M-H]−, PE(O-18:2_22:6) [M-H]−, PE(O-16:1/16:1) [M-H]−, PC(O-20:0_22:2) [M+H]+ and PI(18:0_18:1) [M-H]−. The leave-one-group-out cross-validated LR classification, showed a perfect classification (100% accuracy) of the EVs and cells according to their respective breast cancer subtype (Figure 3b). In addition, a leave-one-group-out cross-validated LR classification analysis showed that breast cancer-derived EVs can be classified into their respective breast cancer subtype with an overall accuracy of 70.4% (Figure 3c), based on the sphingolipids found enriched in breast cancer-derived EVs (Figure 1b, Table S1 and Figure S3).
Details are in the caption following the image


3.4 There is potential in the lipid composition of blood plasma EVs for breast cancer detection

Subsequently, we studied EVs isolated from blood plasma from women diagnosed with breast cancer (primary and progressive metastatic breast cancer samples), and healthy women. The blood plasma from breast cancer patients was obtained from patients with invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), which is the most common histological type of breast cancer, as well as invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC), and ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). These samples included hormone receptor-positive breast cancers (ER+/PR+), HER2+ breast cancers as well as TNBC. Table 1 summarises the pathological characteristics. The EVs isolated from blood plasma were found positive for the EV protein markers CD9 and CD81, and depleted in ApoA1 which is a major protein component of circulating HDL (Figure 4a). These EVs had a density of approximately 1.18–1.23 g/mL and showed a vesicular morphology (Figure 4b). They had an average size of 169.4 nm (mode = 134.9 nm) (Table S4). Significant differences were observed in the number of EVs isolated from blood plasma samples from the healthy volunteers (mean = 2.1E+09 particles/mL) when compared to the primary breast cancer patients (mean = 8.5E+9 particles/mL, p-value < 0.0005) and when compared to the patients with progressive metastatic breast cancer (mean = 3.8E+9 particles/mL, p-value < 0.005) (Figure 4c and Table S4). These results could be attributed to the fact that cancer cells as well as other types of cells triggered by the disease produce EVs, which could contribute to a higher number of EVs circulating in blood from cancer patients. Similarly, significant differences (p-value < 0.05) were observed in the number of EVs isolated from blood plasma samples from primary breast cancer patients when compared to the patients with progressive metastatic breast cancer (Figure 4c and Table S4). The metastatic samples are from breast cancer patients who were under treatment but not responding to the cancer treatment and it is not clear the effect of the treatment in the EVs production from cancer cells and other cells triggered by the disease. Conclusions should not be made based on the number of EVs produced but on their biomolecular composition, EV's cellular origin as well as patients’ clinical information.
TABLE 1. Pathological characteristics of breast cancer samples evaluated. Ten samples from patients with primary cancer were evaluated, as well as nine samples from patients with progressive metastatic breast cancer. The information in the table for progressive metastatic breast cancer samples corresponds to the information reported for the initial breast cancer diagnosis (primary cancer).


Untargeted lipidomic analysis was carried out for the EVs isolated from blood plasma from breast cancer patients (N = 19) and healthy volunteers (N = 10). PCA for the LC-MS data in both ESI+ and ESI− modes showed a separation between breast cancer samples and samples from healthy women, for most of the samples evaluated (Figure 5a). The LC-MS data from the ESI+ and ESI− modes were fused and auto-scaled, and then an LR-RFE analysis was performed. This analysis allowed the identification of phospholipid species which distinguish breast cancer samples from the samples from healthy volunteers (Figure 5b). Those phospholipids included PE(16:0_16:1) [M+OAc]−, PI(22:0_18:3) [M-H]−, PC(16:0_18:1) [M+K]+, LPA(21:0) [M-H]− and LPC(18:0) [M+H-H2O]+. Leave-one-individual-out cross-validated LR classification showed that EVs from breast cancer patients and healthy volunteers can be correctly classified with an overall accuracy of 93.1% based on those lipid species (Figure 5c). In addition, the combination of those phospholipids showed an AUROC equal to 0.94 (Figure 5d).

Importantly, the same phospholipids can also distinguish primary breast cancer patients from healthy volunteers (Figure 6a). Leave-one-individual-out cross-validation analysis showed that samples from primary breast cancer patients (N = 10) and healthy volunteers (N = 10) can be correctly classified with an overall accuracy of 95% (Figure 6b). Similarly, a ROC analysis showed an AUROC equal to 0.97 for the combination of the five phospholipids (Figure 6c). The primary breast cancer samples included samples from early-stage breast cancer patients; negative lymph nodes and DCIS (Table 1).

3.5 Classification of primary and metastatic breast cancers based on blood plasma EVs’ lipid composition

A LR-RFE analysis showed that blood plasma EV's phospholipid and ceramide species (LPC(16:1) [M-H]−, LPC(O-18:2) [M+OAc]−, PS(18:1/18:1) [M-H]−, PS(18:0_18:2) [M-H]− and HexCer(36:1) [M+K]+) allow us to distinguish between primary and metastatic breast cancers (Figure 7a). The leave-one-individual-out cross-validation analysis for the LR-RFE model showed that primary and metastatic cancers can be classified with an overall accuracy of 89.5% (Figure 7b). In addition, a ROC analysis showed an AUROC equal to 0.97 for the combination of those phospholipid and ceramide species (Figure 7c).


4 DISCUSSION

EV's lipid composition is an underexplored field, including the potential in the lipid composition of EVs circulating in blood for breast cancer diagnosis. We demonstrate that untargeted lipidomics is a useful approach for the study of EV's lipid composition and reveal that there is potential in the lipid composition of EVs found in blood plasma for the identification of lipid biomarkers for breast cancer detection.

Initially, we studied the lipid composition of EVs, and their cancerous parental cell lines and we found that sphingolipids (Cer, SM and HexCer) and glycerophospholipids (LPC, LPE, PC, ether-PE, and PI) are enriched in EVs produced by breast cancer cells. Similar results have been evidenced in the study of EVs secreted by prostate cancer cells (Brzozowski et al., 2018). High abundances of sphingolipids have also been detected in other cancer-derived EVs’ studies (Brzozowski et al., 2018; Hosseini-Beheshti et al., 2012; Skotland et al., 2017), including EVs produced by TNBC cells (Nishida-Aoki et al., 2020). Ether phospholipids were also identified in EVs, which together with SM could play an important role in cellular signalling as well as in the stability of the EV's lipid bilayer as their role as endogenous antioxidants has been suggested (Ogretmen, 2018; ean & Lodhi, 2018). Ether phospholipids have also been identified in EVs released by prostate cancer cell lines (Llorente et al., 2013) and urinary EVs from prostate cancer patients (Skotland et al., 2017). Similarly, lysophospholipids were identified in breast cancer-derived EVs, they can act as signalling molecules, but they could also participate in the EV membrane curvature (Fuller & Rand, 2001). Lysophospholipids have also been identified in prostate cancer-derived EVs (Brzozowski et al., 2018; Llorente et al., 2013) and EVs found in blood plasma (Jakubec et al., 2020).

In contrast to EVs, breast cancer cells were enriched in TG and FA. A high content of TG (Eiriksson et al., 2020) and FA (Guenther et al., 2015) was previously reported in cancer cells. Active cell proliferation is fundamental in cancer development and progression and requires the continuous supply of FA (Koundouros & Poulogiannis, 2020). Arachidonic acid (AA) was one of the FA found to be enriched in cells, when compared to EVs. AA is important in cancer development and activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signalling pathway, whose over-activation contributes to cell proliferation, growth, and cell migration in tumour cells, including breast cancer (Fruman et al., 2017; Wymann & Schneiter, 2008). Cells and their secreted EVs can differ in their lipid composition, but there are also lipid species correlated between them. Ether phospholipids species showed a very strong correlation between EVs and their parental cells. A high level of ether lipids has been observed in cancer cells and their participation in cell differentiation and signalling pathways has been suggested (Benjamin et al., 2013; Dean & Lodhi, 2018). In addition, PC and PE species also showed a strong correlation between cells and their EVs. PC and PE are fundamental lipids in biological membranes, which include EVs membranes, but they are also a source of signalling molecules. PE is important in cell curvature and fluidity, facilitating cell budding, fission and fusion (van Meer et al., 2008) and the same function could be played in EVs.

Our in vitro study showed that phospholipid species allow correct classification (100% accuracy) of mammary epithelial cells and their secreted EVs based on their cancerous or non-cancerous origin. In addition, we also found that the EVs produced by the non-cancerous and cancerous cells can be correctly classified with an overall accuracy of 87.9%, based on the sphingolipid species found enriched in EVs when compared to their parental cancer cells. This reflects the fact that metabolic changes are often found in breast cancer tissue (Kang et al., 2011; Nagahashi et al., 2016). We also found that cancerous mammary epithelial cells and their secreted EVs can be correctly classified into their respective ER+/PR+, HER2+ or TNBC subtypes based on their lipid composition. This is in agreement with other studies that have suggested a differentiation of breast cancer subtypes based on the lipid profile of breast cancer cells (Eiriksson et al., 2020). Although the number of cell lines studied per breast cancer subtype is low, and the test can be underpowered because of this, the results of this in vitro study suggest that cancer-derived EVs carry metabolic phenotype information from the cancer subtype from which they were originated.

We translated our in vitro approach and findings into the lipidomic analysis of EVs found in blood plasma from breast cancer patients and healthy women. We found that blood plasma EVs’ lipid species allowed us to correctly classify patients with breast cancer and healthy women with an overall accuracy of 93.1%. This included detection of ER/PR+, HER2+ and TNBC from patients with primary or progressive metastatic cancer. Importantly, we found that when analysing only the samples from the primary breast cancer patients and healthy women, the same combination of lipids allowed us to correctly classify the samples with an overall accuracy of 95%. Only one sample out of the ten primary breast cancer samples analysed was misclassified. The patient's clinical history indicates that adjuvant treatment was given to the patient before the breast surgery, which could suggest that the treatment could have had an effect on the EV composition and/or production. It is important to highlight the fact that our lipidomic analysis of plasma EV-based liquid biopsies allowed correct classification of samples from patients with primary cancer at an early stage (0–2), this includes pre-invasive breast cancer (DCIS, stage 0) and cancers that had not spread to the lymph nodes. Additionally, we found that primary and progressive metastatic breast cancers can be correctly classified with an overall accuracy of 89.5% based on blood plasma EVs’ phospholipid and ceramide species. These findings demonstrate that EVs circulating in breast cancer patients’ blood are a promising source of lipid biomarkers for breast cancer detection, including primary and metastatic cancers, with potential application in detection of breast cancer at an early stage as well as monitoring its progression.

Among the lipids identified in blood plasma EVs relevant in breast cancer detection we found PC and PE which have also been detected in breast cancer tissues as highly abundant lipids (Ide et al., 2013; Punnonen et al., 1989). PE, PC and PI could act as precursors of second messengers including PA, DG and AA which participate in the activation of signalling pathways including PI3K/AKT/mTOR (Foster, 2009; Fruman et al., 2017; Wymann & Schneiter, 2008). PS was found in higher levels in metastatic breast cancers compared to primary breast cancers. The importance of PS as a marker of tumour cells and metastases has been suggested (Riedl et al., 2011). They have also been identified in prostate cancer-derived EVs and urinary EVs from prostate cancer patients (Llorente et al., 2013; Skotland et al., 2017). LPA(21:0) was identified as one of the relevant lipids in breast cancer detection. LPA has also been identified in EVs found in human blood plasma in other studies (Jakubec et al., 2020). Similarly, odd-carbon lipid species, have also been detected in both human blood plasma (Huynh et al., 2019) and EVs found in blood plasma (Jakubec et al., 2020). Odd-chain fatty acids could be produced endogenously or could be associated with the patients’ diet and/or microbiota-derived vesicles. The key role of the human microbiome in carcinogenesis is a growing area of scientific focus (Xavier et al., 2020), and it has been suggested it may play a role in the risk of estrogen-dependent cancers (Plottel & Microbiome, 2011). Interestingly, LPA has been associated with breast cancer metastasis, breast cancer treatment failure and postmenopausal breast cancers (Moolenaar et al., 2004). LPA receptors are abundant in breast cancer and have been associated with activation and upregulation of PI3K/AKT, p38-MAPK and ERK/MAPK signalling pathways, leading to cancer development and progression (Panupinthu et al., 2010).

EVs circulating in blood from cancer patients provide a snapshot of the complex cellular mechanisms triggered by the disease, this includes not only the release of EVs from cancer cells but also non-malignant cells like immune cells. For instance, neutrophil-derived EVs could be detected in blood plasma. It has been suggested that a high neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio is associated with a poor breast cancer prognosis (Gago-Dominguez et al., 2020). In addition, tumour-associated neutrophils can act as tumour promotors depending on the microenvironment and this cellular crosstalk can be facilitated by both cancer and neutrophil-derived EVs (Rubenich et al., 2021). This reinforces the importance of the analysis of EVs found in breast cancer patients’ body fluids, as they are a representative picture of all the molecular and cellular processes involved in cancer. This explains differences that can be found between in vitro and clinical studies. It also demonstrates the importance of appropriate selection of methods of isolation of EVs from blood plasma that deplete the co-isolation of blood plasma components non-associated with the EV protein corona. This also applies for direct analysis of blood plasma, as EV-associated cancer biomarkers could be masked by other major components of blood plasma.

The identification of biomarker candidates for breast cancer detection was beyond the scope of this proof-of-concept study. It serves as a starting point for future clinical studies which will include analysis of larger cohorts of breast cancer patients as well as those with benign breast conditions. Such studies should also include the analysis of tumour tissues as well as blood plasma EVs from patients before and after breast surgery, to establish whether there is a direct relationship between the presence of a tumour in the body and EV-associated cancer biomarkers circulating in the patients’ blood. This analysis of blood plasma EV populations combined with studies of multiple types of cancers will be required for identification of specific EV-based biomarkers for breast cancer detection.

In conclusion, this proof-of-concept study reveals the potential in the lipid composition of EVs found in blood plasma for breast cancer detection. Furthermore, this study demonstrates that untargeted lipidomic analysis is a useful approach for the study of the lipid composition of EVs and for EV-based biomarker discovery studies.

__________________________________

https://isevjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/jex2.146

Characterising the HLA-I immunopeptidome of plasma-derived extracellular vesicles in patients with melanoma



Abstract

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) frequently express human leukocyte antigen class I (HLA-I) molecules. The immunopeptidomes presented on EV HLA-I are being mapped to provide key information on both specific cancer-related peptides, and for larger immunopeptidomic signatures associated with disease. Utilizing HLA-I immunoisolation and mass spectrometry, we characterised the HLA-I immunopeptidome of EVs derived from the melanoma cancer cell line, ESTDAB-026, and the plasma of 12 patients diagnosed with advanced stage melanoma, alongside 11 healthy controls. The EV HLA-I immunopeptidome derived from melanoma cells features T cell epitopes with known immunogenicity and peptides derived from known tumour associated antigens (TAAs). Both T cell epitopes with known immunogenicity and peptides derived from known TAAs were also identifiable in the melanoma patient samples. Patient stratification into two distinct groups with varying immunological profiles was also observed. The data obtained in this study suggests for the first time that the HLA-I immunopeptidome of EVs derived from blood may aid in the detection of important diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers and also provide new immunotherapy targets.
1 INTRODUCTION

Over the last 30 years, whilst major advances in the treatment options and the understanding of melanoma have developed, the incidence rates of the disease have doubled (Weiss et al., 2019). The first line of treatment for patients with early stage melanoma is surgical resection, however, more than 40% of high-risk patients that receive surgical excision as the only initial treatment will result in a local or distant disease relapse (Testori et al., 2020). The mutational load of melanoma is known to be high, resulting in melanoma being the most fatal form of skin cancer, despite only being responsible for one percent of all skin cancer diagnoses (Domingues et al., 2018). This high mutational burden leads to altered protein sequences being presented by human leukocyte antigen class I (HLA-I) proteins and thus promotes T cell responses (Brenner & Hearing, 2008). Melanosomal proteins, such as MART-1, tyrosinase and gp100 are also frequently recognized by the host T cells, resulting in further activation of a cytotoxic response (Kawakami & Rosenberg, 1996). Melanoma cells have also been demonstrated to regularly re-express the group of developmental proteins known as cancer/testis antigens, which are also often recognized by the host immune system (Weiss et al., 2019). These various features of melanoma cells enable them to be particularly susceptible to immune modulating therapies. Several such therapies have had clinical success in the treatment of metastatic melanoma, including treatment with immune checkpoint inhibiting monoclonal antibodies targeting CTLA-4 and PD-1. The success of these immunotherapies has further highlighted the importance of HLA-I presentation in effective immune responses against melanoma, and the need for a full characterisation of the immunopeptidome being displayed to the immune system.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are small membrane vesicles, typically with a diameter of 50–200 nm that are derived from several sources including the cell surface and from intracellular sources such as multivesicular bodies (MVB). EVs are secreted by almost all human cells into the extracellular space and have the ability to carry bioactive lipids, nucleic acids and proteins as their cargo. The presence of HLA-I antigen presenting molecules on the surface of EVs, and their ability to present antigenic peptides to T cells, has been well established (Raposo et al., 1996; Théry et al., 1999; Wolfers et al., 2001). Currently, whilst the peptide ligandome (or immunopeptidome) presented by cell surface HLA-I molecules on cancer cells has been extensively investigated, the EV immunopeptidome remains poorly characterised.

Given that cancer cells are known to release EVs into the circulation, there is reason to believe that such EVs in the blood of patients with cancer could provide information and insight into the state of disease. EVs have already been studied extensively as possible cancer biomarkers to measure disease progression with substantial focus being placed on protein expression. Peinado et al. (2012) found that EVs sourced from the blood of patients diagnosed with stage IV melanoma commonly expressed a number of proteins including oncoprotein MET, very late antigen 4 (VLA-4), heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) and the melanoma-specific protein tyrosinase-related protein-2 (TYRP2). Further, the expression of scaffolding protein caveolin-1 on EVs found in the blood, is also considered a biomarker for melanoma as Logozzi et al. (2009) found that melanoma patient plasma EVs were enriched for this protein. Whilst protein expression of cancer patient blood EVs has been well described as a potential source of biomarkers, the HLA-I immunopeptidome of EVs isolated from the blood of patients with cancer is yet to be extensively defined. In recent work we have shown that the immunopeptidome of EVs derived from breast cancer cell lines does indeed contain known tumour-associated T-cell epitopes and immunogenic peptides (Kumar et al., 2022). In this study, we now show that we can detect the immunopeptidome of EVs derived from melanoma patient blood, and that they can also provide information related to the functionality and immunogenicity of the peptides detected on EVs.
2 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
2.1 ESTDAB-026 cell line and biological samples

Melanoma cell line ESTDAB-026 was obtained from Prof Graham Pawelec and the European Searchable Tumour cell Bank Database (Tubingen, Germany). Twelve melanoma patient samples were obtained from the Manchester Cancer Research Centre Biobank and were characterised as Stage III or Stage IV melanoma (Table 1). Twelve healthy control blood samples were obtained from within the School of Medicine, University of St Andrews under local ethics permission.


2.2 Characterisation of cells and extracellular vesicles

For nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), ESTDAB-026 cells were cultured for 24 h in serum free RPMI 1640 medium (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK). The conditioned media was then collected and centrifuged at 283 × g for 10 mins at 4°C to remove cells and large debris, and then filtered with 0.22 μm Millex-GP syringe filters (Merck, UK). NTA was performed using a LM-10 unit (Malvern, UK) equipped with a 638 nm laser. Three videos of 30 s length were recorded for each sample with shutter speeds of 17 or 30 ms. Data analysis was performed using NTA 2.3 software with detection thresholds of three.

For flow cytometry, cells grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 5% FBS (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK) were harvested from culture flasks with a 1–2 min incubation with the addition of trypsin (0.025%)-EDTA (0.01%) solution at 37°C. Cells were then resuspended in culture medium and centrifuged at 283 × g for 10 mins at 4°C followed by resuspension in PFN buffer (PBS, 2% FBS, 0.1% Na azide). Cells were stained with primary mouse IgG anti-HLA-A, -B, and -C monoclonal antibody W6/32 (Parham et al., 1979) for 20 min at 4°C, followed by two washes with centrifugation steps as above in PFN. Cells were then stained with the secondary antibody: FITC-anti-mouse IgG (Sigma-Aldrich UK, F2012) at a dilution of 1:100 for 20 min and washed as above. Control cells received second stage FITC anti-mouse IgG alone. Cells were analysed on a Merck-Millipore Guava 8HT flow cytometer with a 488 nm laser using Guavasoft 2.7 software.

For immunoblotting, ESTDAB-026 cells were grown in 175 cm2 flasks for 48 h in serum free medium. After 48 h, the conditioned media was collected, spun and filtered through 0.22 μm filters as above for NTA. Culture supernatants were then spun at 98,380 × g for 2 h using a SW32Ti swing-out rotor in a Beckman L100 ultracentrifuge. The resulting EV pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4, supplemented with Pierce mini-protease inhibitor tablets) to create EV lysates. Cell lysates were prepared concomitantly by lysis of the cells remaining in the culture flasks with the same lysis buffer, and spun at 21,130 × g for 10 min at 4°C to remove nuclei and insoluble debris. Protein estimations were performed by Bradford assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK). About 3 μg of cell and EV lysates and were electrophoresed on 4%–20% gradient SDS-PAGE gels (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK) and transferred to nitrocellulose (BA85, ThermoFisher Scientific, UK). Membranes were probed with anti-CD9, CD63 and CD81 antibodies (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK clones Ts9, Ts63 and M38, respectively) at 1:5000 dilution, anti-HLA-B and -C mouse monoclonal antibody HC10 (Stam et al., 1986) at 1:1000 dilution and rabbit monoclonal anti-human calnexin (Abcam UK, ab213243) at 1:1000 dilution. Immunoblot signals were revealed with 1:10,000 diluted IR Dye800cw anti-mouse or anti-rabbit IgG (LI-COR, UK) and were then visualized using a LI-COR Odyssey scanner.

For immunoblotting of melanoma and healthy control blood samples, 1 mL vials of patient plasma were thawed and centrifuged at 21,130 × g for 5 min at 4°C to deplete remaining platelets or debris. For size exclusion chromatography (SEC) 10 mL plastic columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) sealed at the base with fibre glass frits were loaded with Sepharose CL-4B beads (Sigma-Aldrich UK), a second frit placed at the top and the column washed with 20 mL of PBS. About 1 mL of the platelet-depleted plasma was then loaded onto the column. Once the sample had passed through the top frit, approximately 12 mL of PBS was added to the top chamber and 10 × 1 mL fractions were collected. The optical density (280 nm) of each fraction was then assessed by NanoVue Plus Spectrophotometer (Biochrom, Ltd.). Fractions of interest were spun at 124,436 × g for 30 min using a SW55Ti swing-out rotor in a Beckman L100 ultracentrifuge. The resulting EV pellets were resuspended in 30 μL reducing sample buffer. Plasma derived EVs were electrophoresed on 4%–20% gradient SDS-PAGE gels (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK) and transferred to nitrocellulose filters (BA85, ThermoFisher Scientific, UK). Membranes were probed with anti-CD9 antibody (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK clone Ts9) at 1:5000 dilution and anti-HLA-B and -C mouse monoclonal antibody HC10 (Stam et al., 1986) at 1:1000 dilution. Immunoblot signals were revealed with 1:10,000 diluted IR Dye800cw anti-mouse (LI-COR, UK) and were then visualized using a LI-COR Odyssey scanner. Pixel density was measured using Fiji (ImageJ, https://imagej.net/software/fiji/).

For transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging, EV isolated by ultracentrifugation from cell line ESTDAB-026 as per above were resuspended in 0.1 mL PBS. Plasma EV were isolated by SEC in PBS as described in the next section, and were concentrated by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 × g for 30 min in an SW55Ti rotor, followed by resuspension in 0.1 mL PBS. About 50 μL of the EV suspensions were fixed for 10 min by mixing with an equal volume of 4% paraformaldehyde. About 20 μL of these samples were then placed on parafilm and TEM grids (glow discharged Formvar film on copper grid, Agar Scientific, UK) were placed inverted onto the sample for 10 min at room temperature. The grids were then lifted and placed (sample side down) onto 20 μL drops of UA-Zero EM stain (Agar Scientific, UK) for 10 min at room temperature. The grids were then washed by dipping in a 50 mL volume of PBS three times for approximately 5 s each, and then dried on filter paper at room temperature. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging and measurements were performed on a FEI Titan Themis operated at 200 kV and equipped with a 4k × 4k Ceta CMOS camera.
2.3 EV and cell isolation for HLA-I peptide isolation

The ESTDAB-026 cell line was cultured in Falcon five-layer multi-flasks with a total surface area of 875 cm2 (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK) with RPMI 1640 supplemented with EV depleted 2.5% foetal bovine serum (FBS) and 50 μg/mL kanamycin (all ThermoFisher Scientific, UK). The FBS was depleted of EVs by ultracentrifugation at 98,380 × g for 4 h at 4°C using a SW32Ti rotor in a Beckman L100 ultracentrifuge, followed by 0.2 μm filtration. When the culture flasks reached 80% cell confluence, fresh culture medium was added to flasks and the cell culture supernatant was harvested every 48–72 h. EV supernatant harvests were 0.2 μm filtered and spun at 98,380 × g for 2 h using a Sw32Ti rotor and the EV pellet lysed in lysis buffer (1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4, supplemented with Pierce mini-protease inhibitor tablets), and stored at −20°C until immunoprecipitation. Cell harvesting was carried out by brief incubation with trypsin-EDTA solution at 37°C and cells spun at 300 × g for 10 min at 4°C. Cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer as above, spun at 21,130 × g for 10 min at 4°C to remove nuclei and debris and the cell lysates were stored at −20°C until immunoprecipitation.

For the melanoma and healthy control blood samples, as above for immunoblotting, 1 mL vials of patient plasma were thawed and centrifuged at 21,130 × g for 5 min at 4°C to deplete platelets or debris. SEC 10 mL plastic columns were prepared with Sepharose 4B as above. Samples of plasma were then loaded into the column. 10 × 1 mL fractions were collected as above. Optical density of each fraction was then assessed by NanoVue Plus Spectrophotometer (Biochrom, Ltd). Fraction numbers 4–6 for each myeloma patient sample and 4–7 for each melanoma and breast cancer patient sample were pooled and lysed in lysis buffer (1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4) then stored until immunoprecipitation.
2.4 Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analysis

The immunoprecipitation protocol was conducted as follows. EV and cell lysates of volumes between 5 and 10 mL in 15 mL tubes were incubated with 0.3–0.5 mL W6/32-coupled Protein G-Sepharose beads (crosslinked using BS3 according to manufacturer instructions, ThermoFisher Scientific, UK) for 1–2 h. The beads were then pelleted by centrifugation at 283 × g for 2 min. This was followed by washing the beads by adding 15 mL wash buffer (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4), inverting the tubes several times to fully resuspend the beads and recentrifugation at 283 × g for 2 min. After at least five wash steps the beads were resuspended in 1 mL of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 10 min at room temperature to release HLA-I and bound peptides. Peptides were then isolated on Pierce C18 100 μL tips (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK, 87784) based on manufacturer instructions. Briefly, tips were wetted twice in 0.1 mL 50% acetonitrile (ACN), and equilibrated twice in the same volume of 0.1% TFA. Samples in 1.0% TFA were then passed through the tip twice. The tip was washed twice in 0.1 mL of 0.1% TFA and then eluted with 0.1 mL of 30% or 40% ACN and 0.1% TFA. For ESTDAB-026, the peptide fractions were eluted in 30% ACN and 0.1% TFA and dried down by speedvac for mass spectrometry. For the melanoma patient and healthy control biological samples, the peptide fractions were eluted in 40% ACN and 0.1% TFA and dried down by speedvac for mass spectrometry.

Peptide samples were processed by mass spectrometry. ESTDAB-026 samples peptides were analysed on an AB Sciex TripleTOF 5600+system mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, MA) coupled to an Eksigent nanoLC AS-2/2Dplus system. The samples were loaded in MS loading buffer (2% ACN and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid) and bound to an Aclaim pepmap 100 μm × 2-cm trap (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and washed for 10 mins to waste after which the trap was turned in-line with the analytical column (Aclaim pepmap RSLC 75 μm × 15 cm). The analytical solvent system consisted of buffer A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (2% water with 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 Nl/min with the following gradient: linear 1%−20% of buffer B over 90 mins, linear 20%–40% of buffer B for 30 min, linear 40%−99% of buffer B for 10 min, isocratic 99% of buffer B for 5 min, linear 99 −1% of buffer B for 2.5 min, and isocratic 1% solvent buffer B for 12.5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the DDA top 20 positive ion mode on charged ions with 2+ to 5+, with 120 and 80 ms acquisition time for the MS1 (m/z 400−1250) and MS2 (m/z 95−1800) scans, respectively, and 15-s dynamic exclusion. Rolling collision energy was used for fragmentation.

Melanoma and healthy control biological sample peptides were subjected to liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS interface. Peptides were injected onto a reverse- phase trap (Pepmap100 C18 5 μm 0.3 × 5 mm) for pre-concentration and desalted with MS loading buffer, at 5 μL/min for 10 min. The peptide trap was then switched into line with the analytical column (Easy-spray Pepmap RSLC C18 2 μm, 15 cm × 75 μm ID). Peptides were eluted from the column using a linear solvent gradient using the following gradient: linear 4%−40% of buffer MS-B over 45 min, linear 40%−95% of buffer MS-B for 4 min, isocratic 95% of buffer MS-B for 6 min, sharp decrease to 2% buffer MS-B within 0.1 min and isocratic 2% buffer MS-B for 10 min. The mass spectrometer was equipped with FAIMS at two voltages (−45 V, −65 V) and operated in DDA positive ion mode with a cycle time of 1.5 s. The Orbitrap was selected as the MS1 detector at a resolution of 60000 with a scan range of from m/z 375–1500. Peptides with charge states 2–5 were selected for fragmentation in the Orbitrap (resolution: 30,000) using CID as collision energy.
2.5 Peptide identification

Peptide identification was achieved with Mascot Server Software (Matrix Science). For peptide identification, the raw data files were converted into MZxml using MSconvert (ProteoWizard) and searched using Mascot with against the Swissprot database, restricted only to proteins from humans (updated monthly). The mass accuracy for the MS scan was set to 20 ppm and for the fragment ion mass was set to 0.1 Da. No enzyme was selected with 4 missed cleavages allowed. Oxidised methionine was selected as variable modification. Both assigned and unassigned peptides were selected for further filtering and analysis.
2.6 HLA-typing

ESTDAB-026 is HLA-I typed as HLA-A02:01, HLA-A68:01, HLA-B15:01, HLA-B44:02, HLA-C03:03, HLA-C07:04, as determined by the Immune polymorphism database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/estdab/). In the absence of HLA-I typing of the melanoma and healthy control blood samples the 19 most common UK HLA-I alleles were used in subsequent searches (http://www.allelefrequencies.net/pop6001a_gsb.asp). The HLA-alleles assessed were as follows: HLA-A01:01, HLA-A02:01, HLA-A03:01, HLA- A11:01, HLA-A24:02, HLA-B07:02, HLA-B08:01, HLA-B15:01, HLA-B18:01, HLA-B27:01, HLA- B35:01, HLA-B44:02, HLA-B51:01, HLA-B57:01, HLA-C03:01, HLA-C04:01, HLA-C05:01, HLA- C06:02 and HLA-C07:02.
2.7 HLA-I peptide binding affinity and data analysis

Eluted peptides identified from each replicate were combined, duplicate peptides were removed and filtered to select 8–15 amino acid long peptides. The total number of 8–15 mer peptides was defined as HLA-I immunopeptidome of cell and EVs from ESTDAB-026 and EVs from the blood samples. Peptides present in the HLA-I immunopeptidome were assessed for their predicted allele-binding and affinity using algorithm netMHCpan 4.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCpan/) (Jurtz et al., 2017) using default settings. Peptides with IC50 up to 1000 nM were considered to have high predicted binding affinity to HLA-I and were tabulated. Plots of predicted binding affinity of HLA-I immunopeptidome for ESTDAB-026 were made using Prism 8 (GraphPad Inc.) software. For identification of immunogenic peptides reported in previous studies and the peptides derived from tumour-associated proteins, peptides with 8–15 amino acid length were searched against the Tantigen database (http://projects.met-hilab.org/tadb/index.php). For analysis of pathway representation within peptide datasets, peptides were matched to proteins using the peptide2protein conversion tool on the piNET server (piNET, LINCS—http://www.pinet-server.org/pinet/peptideToProtein). Protein lists were then compiled by cancer type and a statistical overrepresentation test was carried out using PANTHER classification system (PANTHERdb V17.0, http://www.pantherdb.org/about.jsp). The annotation data set Reactome Pathways was employed and Fisher's Exact Test with Bonferroni correction for multiple testing were applied to assess significance.
3 RESULTS
3.1 Characterisation of ESTDAB-026 melanoma cell line and extracellular vesicles

Immunoblot analysis was performed on cell and EV lysates of ESTDAB-026 cells after 48 h of growth in serum free conditions (Figure 1A). EVs were enriched for HLA-I (HLA-B and C, detected with mAb HC10) and CD9, but were low for CD63 and CD81. The EV preparation was also negative for ER–resident calnexin. NTA of 24 h serum-free supernatant identified the presence of sub-200 nm particles with a mean and mode of 196 and 189 nm, respectively (Figure 1B). Cell surface flow cytometry analysis using the monoclonal antibody W6/32 (Figure 1C) confirmed the expression of HLA-A, B and C molecules on the cell line. Further, we performed transmission electron microscopy (TEM) on ESTDAB-026 EV isolated by ultracentrifugation which confirmed the presence of typical cup-shaped vesicles (Figure S1). In addition, we performed flow cytometry on ESTDAB-026 EV after overnight absorption to CD9-magnetic beads. Positive staining was observed with antibodies recognising CD9 and HLA-I, but not the negative control T-cell receptor protein CD3 (Figure S2). This confirms expression and correct orientation of HLA-I on ESTDAB-026 EV. Taken together, this characterisation data confirms the vesicles isolated from this cell lines as typical of a population of EVs based on MISEV guidelines.
Details are in the caption following the image


3.2 ESTDAB-026 cell surface versus extracellular vesicle HLA-I immunopeptidome

Our previously established protocol (Kumar et al., 2022) was used to investigate the HLA-immunopeptidome of both cell and EV lysates. This optimises the speed of cell and EV lysate HLA-I immunoisolation to conserve lower affinity peptide interactions. To confirm the status of the EV isolated by ultracentrifugation compared to those directly studied by NTA shown in Figure 1, we analysed EV containing cell supernatant pre-and post-ultracentrifugation. No significant difference in size or distribution of particles was detected (Figure S3). HLA-I peptide samples were analysed by mass spectrometry, using a Sciex TripleTOF 5600 instrument, and peptides were identified using Mascot DB software. Eluted peptides from independent replicates of cell or EV lysates were combined, and duplicate peptides removed to obtain a complete list of unique 8 and 15 mer eluted peptides from either ESTDAB-026 cells or EVs. Details of relevant peptides identified are presented in a subsequent section.

A total of 3590 cell-derived and 2485 EV-derived peptides were identified (Table 2). After size and HLA-I binding affinity prediction algorithm (netMHCpan 4.0) analysis, 315 and 482 peptides were characterised as HLA-I binding for cells and EV respectively. The predicted binding affinity distribution of these peptides’ affinity to the six cell line specific alleles (HLA-A02.01, HLA-A68.01, HLA-B15.01, HLA-B44.02, HLA-C03.03 and HLA-C07.04) is presented in Figure 2. There is a notable ‘teardrop’ pattern discernible in the data from alleles HLA-A2.01, -A68.01 and -B15.01 that indicates a pool of high affinity peptides.


3.3 Identification of T-cell epitopes and peptides derived from tumour-associated antigens isolated from the HLA-I molecules of ESTDAB-026 cell surface and extracellular vesicles

Peptides identified on the cell surface and the EV immunopeptidomes were searched to establish the presence of tumour antigenic peptides and determine whether any of those identified could be considered immunogenic based on previous reports of T cell activity. The cell and EV immunopeptidome were searched using the Tantigen database. The number of identified T-cell epitopes from cell and EV ligandomes identified with Mascot DB are presented in Table 3, respectively. A total of two peptides from the cell immunopeptidome were identified to match known T-cell epitopes. In the EV immunopeptidome, the same two peptides were also detected (Table 3). There is direct potential clinical relevance for these T-cell epitopes, with peptide ETIPLTAEKL being an epitope within Cyclin-D1 (CCND1). CCND1 is a classified oncogene, known to be implicated in the promotion of uncontrolled cell proliferation and has been described to be highly expressed in melanoma (González-Ruiz et al., 2020).

The peptides identified on the cell and EV ligandomes of ESTDAB-026 were then searched for the presence of peptides that could be identified as being derived from known tumour associated antigen (TAA) proteins. These TAA proteins are known to be upregulated in cancer, however, many of the HLA-I binding peptides of these particular proteins have not been identified previously. Therefore, the peptides identified to be derived from the TAA proteins may or may not be antigenic. Tantigen database was used to identify peptides derived from the full-length protein sequences of TAA. A total of five peptides were identified to be derived from TAA on the cell surface ligandome (Table S1). In the EV ligandome, a total of 15 peptides were identified to be derived from TAA (Table S2). In summary this data indicates that HLA-I on EV can display potentially clinically relevant antigenic peptides.
3.4 The HLA-I ligandome of melanoma patient blood derived extracellular vesicles

To determine if our findings with in vitro cell line derived EVs could also apply to plasma derived EVs, we studied the HLA-I immunopeptidomes of EVs isolated from both normal control and melanoma patient plasma samples. Platelet-depleted plasma was processed by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) to generate 10 fractions, in which fractions 4–6 typically contained EVs expressing CD9 and HLA-I as determined by immunoblotting (Figures 3 and S5). The pixel density obtained from the immunoblots was plotted against the optical density measurements of eluted fractions, indicating that the EV elute towards the front of the main bulk of plasma proteins. Further, we performed transmission electron microscopy (TEM) on healthy control plasma derived EV isolated by SEC to confirm the presence of vesicles (Figure S1). Sizes of particles eluting in the SEC were also analysed by NTA and averaged mean sizes of 178 nm and modes of 138 nm (Figure S4). An assessment for potential lipoproteins co-eluting with EV in SEC, which is common in this technique, was not performed in this current study. However, lipids and lipoproteins do not carry HLA-I molecules and are therefore unlikely to impact our immunopeptidome analysis. Duplicate plasma samples were re-run, fractions 4–7 pooled, detergent lysed and immunoisolated with W6/32 beads, followed by peptide extraction and mass spectrometry as above for the cell line study.

The overall number of peptides detected in the HLA-I immunopeptidome of the melanoma plasma derived EVs was significantly higher than that of the controls (Figure 4A). We also noted that the melanoma plasma samples stratified into two clear distinct groups, with half of the samples displaying a high number of peptides (referred herein as MEL-high) and the other half resulting in the detection of a lower number of peptides (referred herein as MEL-low), with the latter similar to that detected in the control samples (Figure 4A). Upon comparison of the unique peptides detected in the MEL-high, MEL-low and control samples, MEL-high samples resulted in a substantially higher percentage of unique peptides (Figure 4B), whilst MEL-low yielded a higher overlap of peptides with the control samples (Figure 4C). To analyse the potential differences between the two patient groups (MEL-high vs. MEL-low) peptide length distribution was assessed, with no significant variation observed between the sample groups (Figure 4D). Analysis of the distribution of peptide binding affinity to the 19 most common UK HLA-I types showed variations in the number of peptides with high predicted binding affinity (Figure 4E). To investigate the existence of functional variations between the groups, a statistical overrepresentation test was used to identify functional pathways that were significantly altered in each sample group (Figure 4F), with MEL-high, MEL-low and the control group displaying varying functional profiles. Several of the pathways identified as being overexpressed are also of clinical significance and relevance to melanoma. For example, the overexpression of keratinization identified in the MEL-high data impacts on keratinocyte differentiation and their local epidermal microenvironment (Kodet et al., 2015). The HLA-I immunopeptidomes were then searched for the presence of additional peptides derived from TAA proteins. Significantly more TAAs were detected in MEL-high group after initial analysis (Figure 4G), however, when adjusted for the total number of peptides yielded, the number of TAAs did not vary significantly between MEL-high, MEL-low or the control group (Figure 4H). Full details of the peptides identified to be derived from TAAs are presented in Table S3.


3.5 Identification of T-cell epitopes isolated from the HLA-I molecules of melanoma patient blood derived extracellular vesicles

Finally, peptides that were identified on the melanoma plasma derived EV immunopeptidomes were searched for tumour antigens and reported T cell activity. A total of 10 peptides from the EV ligandome were identified to match known T-cell epitopes, according to the Tantigen database search (Table 4).



4 DISCUSSION

The characterisation of the HLA-I immunopeptidome landscape of both normal and tumour derived EVs will potentially provide molecular signatures associated with both health and disease, and in the latter case, may also provide a library of potential immunotherapy target antigens. To date, however, there is a significant lack of comprehensive knowledge of EV HLA-I immunopeptidomes. Whilst a range of diseases may be potentially reported on by studying the EV HLA-I immunopeptidome, as impacted cells alter their protein expression, it is perhaps in the area of cancer where significant observations may be made. The data presented in this study suggests that the HLA-I immunopeptidome of cancer EVs can be successfully characterised for EVs derived from melanoma patient blood samples. It is also confirmed that it is possible to identify both T cell epitopes and TAA peptides derived from TAA proteins in EV immunopeptidomes.

The ability to obtain valuable information in the context of cancer from a readily accessible biofluid is an attractive prospect. The results presented in this study highlight the extent of information that the HLA-I ligandomes of EVs present in patient blood can offer and the fact that these EVs can be obtained relatively non-invasively, without the need for a more invasive or biopsy, means that they could be considered a repeatable source of information regarding the state of disease over time. The presence of T cell epitopes in a number of the melanoma patient plasma samples investigated further confirms that there are clinically relevant and immunogenic antigens present on the HLA-I ligandome of plasma EVs obtained from melanoma cancer patients. The detection of these immunogenic peptides on the HLA-I ligandome of EVs derived from the blood of melanoma patients also further raises the possibility that EVs are utilised by cancer cells as a method of immune evasion as we have previously suggested (Kumar et al., 2022). As such EVs enter the circulation and typically travel away from the cancer cell site of origin, they could potentially activate or alter T cells off-target, thus reducing direct tumour cell death. There have been very few studies on the ability of HLA-I peptides on EVs to activate CD8+ T cells, however, one study investigated the ability of EVs to activate CD8+ T cells with common antigenic viral peptides (Admyre et al., 2006). IFNγ secretion was detected, thus indicating cytotoxic T cell activation by EVs and therefore, it is reasonable to predict that cancer derived EVs are also able to directly activate T cells.

Whilst known T cell epitopes and peptides derived from known TAAs were identifiable in the HLA-I ligandome of blood derived EVs, there is not yet an efficient algorithm or data analysis method to easily identify tumour-specific antigens (TSAs) or neoantigens. TSAs are known to be derived from various forms of non-synonymous somatic mutations including single nucleotide variations, frameshift mutations, structural mutations, fusion genes and insertions and deletions (Greenman et al., 2007). These non-synonymous somatic mutations occur during tumorigenesis due to the occurrence of DNA mutations of the cells that subsequently results in the dysfunctionality of peptide synthesis (Wirth & Kühnel, 2017). As a result, TSAs are typically only expressed by cancer cells. The EVs released from cancer cells carry many of the same peptides as that of the cancer cell surface HLA-I molecules and therefore, it is very likely that TSA/neoantigens will also be carried by EVs. As many of the peptide assignment analysis techniques require reference databases, it is more difficult to identify these TSAs from mass spectrometry data. Improved methods and algorithms to identify such TSA peptides efficiently is required to fully capitalise on the EV-based analysis we report here.

To date, no previous reports show overall alterations in the HLA-I immunopeptidome of EVs in cancer patients. This study indicates that melanoma patients may be stratified into two various immunological profile groups based on the numbers of peptides present on the HLA-I ligandomes of blood derived EVs. Further study on more samples is required to understand why this is occurring. Whilst cancer patient stratification based on the EV immunopeptidome has not been described before, different EV-RNA profiles have been ascribed to responders and non-responders of chemotherapeutic agent dacomitinib in patients diagnosed with recurrent glioblastoma (Yekula et al., 2021). Further exploration with patient samples that are fully characterised regarding the treatment regimens received and associated clinical outcomes will be required for a full understanding of the importance of immunopeptidome stratification in melanoma patients.

T cell epitopes identified in the EV immunopeptidome of our samples are of clinical relevance. The peptide KASSSLQLVF, detected in the EV ligandome of MEL-2, is a known T cell epitope of Melanoma-associated Antigen 3 (MAGE-A3), which is a cancer testis antigen that has been well characterised for its’ role in melanoma as a tumour antigen (Boon & van der Bruggen, 1996; Brasseur et al., 1995). Due to the high immunogenicity of this antigen, there have been a number of clinical trials that utilise anti-MAGE-A3 immunotherapy in the treatment of metastatic melanoma (Hersey et al., 2004; Palucka et al., 2003; Schuler-Thurner et al., 2002). Further, the peptide ALLQAEAPRL, detected in the EV immunopeptidome of sample MEL-6, is a known T cell epitope of squamous cell carcinoma antigen recognized by T-cells 3 (SART-3). SART-3 is a nuclear protein that is known to have involvement in tumour immunogenicity, particularly in the context of melanoma, and is involved in the regulation of several oncogenic proteins (Whitmill et al., 2016). It has also been shown that high expression of SART-3 in melanoma patients is associated with a poorer overall survival rate, likely due to its’ substantial role in the regulation of inflammatory cytokine interleukine-8 (Timani et al., 2018).

At present, a full map of the ‘normal’ EV HLA-I immunopeptidome and that of cancers has not been fully explored. The data presented in this report alongside our previous study (Kumar et al., 2022), highlights the significance of studying the peptide repertoire found on EVs. Whilst there are still many questions relating to the clinical relevance and disease outcome of these novel findings, we propose that fully exploring the plasma EV HLA-I immunopeptidome in both health and disease will prove to be a source of highly useful information.






_________________________________





Parallel SPR and QCM-D Quantitative Analysis of CD9, CD63, and CD81 Tetraspanins: A Simple and Sensitive Way to Determine the Concentration of Extracellular Vesicles Isolated from Human Lung Cancer Cells

A. Kowalczyk, Aleksandra Gajda-Walczak, Monika Ruzycka-Ayoush
12 juin 2023


Key Takeaway: Our developed immunosensors are simple, fast, and sensitive for determining the concentration of extracellular vesicles isolated from human lung cancer cells using tetraspanins as biomarkers.

Abstract

Tetraspanins, including CD9, CD63, and CD81, are transmembrane biomarkers that play a crucial role in regulating cancer cell proliferation, invasion, and metastasis, as well as plasma membrane dynamics and protein trafficking. In this study, we developed simple, fast, and sensitive immunosensors to determine the concentration of extracellular vesicles (EVs) isolated from human lung cancer cells using tetraspanins as biomarkers. We employed surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D) as detectors. The monoclonal antibodies targeting CD9, CD63, and CD81 were oriented vertically in the receptor layer using either a protein A sensor chip (SPR) or a cysteamine layer that modified the gold crystal (QCM-D) without the use of amplifiers. The SPR studies demonstrated that the interaction of EVs with antibodies could be described by the two-state reaction model. Furthermore, the EVs’ affinity to monoclonal antibodies against tetraspanins decreased in the following order: CD9, CD63, and CD81, as confirmed by the QCM-D studies. The results indicated that the developed immunosensors were characterized by high stability, a wide analytical range from 6.1 × 104 particles·mL–1 to 6.1 × 107 particles·mL–1, and a low detection limit (0.6–1.8) × 104 particles·mL–1. A very good agreement between the results obtained using the SPR and QCM-D detectors and nanoparticle tracking analysis demonstrated that the developed immunosensors could be successfully applied to clinical samples.

___________________________________________



Clinical Implications of Peripheral CD3+CD69+ T-cell and CD8+CD28+ T-cell Proportions in Patients Prior to Radical Prostatectomy.

Yu Zhang, Ziye Zhang, Lina Zhang
16 mai 2020



Key Takeaway: Higher CD3+CD69+ T-cell and CD8+CD28+ T-cell proportions in peripheral blood are associated with prostate cancer risk and may predict pathological Grade Group in men prior to radical prostatectomy.

Abstract

PURPOSE
To investigate the clinical implications of CD3+CD69+ T-cells and CD8+CD28+ T-cells in the peripheral blood of patients prior to radical prostatectomy.


MATERIALS AND METHODS
A total of 91 prostate cancer (PCa) patients and 50 benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) patients were enrolled from January 2016 to December 2017. The proportions of CD3+CD69+ T-cells and CD8+CD28+ T-cells in the peripheral blood of PCa and BPH patients were detected by flow cytometry, and the association of these T-cell populations with pathological Grade Group and pathological TNM classification was evaluated. Data analysis was performed with SAS version 9.4 software.


RESULTS
The proportions of CD3+CD69+ and CD8+CD28+ T-cells in peripheral blood were higher in PCa patients than those in BPH patients. Multivariate analysis identified a higher CD3+CD69+ T-cell proportion as a risk factor for PCa (odds ratio (OR)=4.783, P=0.0013), but the diagnostic efficacy of the CD3+CD69+ T-cell proportion (area under the curve (AUC)=0.6833, P=0.0003) for PCa was still inferior to that of the tPSA level (AUC=0.7531, P<0.0001). The AUCs for CD3+CD69+ T-cell and CD8+CD28+ T-cell proportions for PCa were 0.6959 (P=0.0372) and 0.6935 (P=0.0395), respectively, among men with tPSA levels of 4.0-10.0 ng/ml. A lower CD3+CD69+ T-cell proportion was associated with higher pathological Grade Group (P=0.0074).


CONCLUSION
The proportions of CD3+CD69+ T-cells and CD8+CD28+ T-cells in peripheral blood are potential diagnostic indicators for PCa. The preoperative proportion of CD3+CD69+ T-cells in peripheral blood may have prognostic value in terms of the pathological Grade Group in PCa.

___________________________________________





